# VK_KHR_video_decode_h264

## Metadata

- **Component**: features
- **Version**: latest
- **URL**: /features/latest/features/proposals/VK_KHR_video_decode_h264.html

## Table of Contents

- [1. Problem Statement](#_problem_statement)
- [1._Problem_Statement](#_problem_statement)
- [2. Solution Space](#_solution_space)
- [2._Solution_Space](#_solution_space)
- [3. Proposal](#_proposal)
- [3.1. Video Std Headers](#_video_std_headers)
- [3.1._Video_Std_Headers](#_video_std_headers)
- [3.2. H.264 Decode Profiles](#_h_264_decode_profiles)
- [3.2._H.264_Decode_Profiles](#_h_264_decode_profiles)
- [3.3. H.264 Decode Capabilities](#_h_264_decode_capabilities)
- [3.3._H.264_Decode_Capabilities](#_h_264_decode_capabilities)
- [3.4. H.264 Decode Parameter Sets](#_h_264_decode_parameter_sets)
- [3.4._H.264_Decode_Parameter_Sets](#_h_264_decode_parameter_sets)
- [3.5. H.264 Decoding Parameters](#_h_264_decoding_parameters)
- [3.5._H.264_Decoding_Parameters](#_h_264_decoding_parameters)
- [4. Examples](#_examples)
- [4.1. Select queue family with H.264 decode support](#_select_queue_family_with_h_264_decode_support)
- [4.1._Select_queue_family_with_H.264_decode_support](#_select_queue_family_with_h_264_decode_support)
- [4.2. Check support and query the capabilities for an H.264 decode profile](#_check_support_and_query_the_capabilities_for_an_h_264_decode_profile)
- [4.2._Check_support_and_query_the_capabilities_for_an_H.264_decode_profile](#_check_support_and_query_the_capabilities_for_an_h_264_decode_profile)
- [4.3. Create and update H.264 video session parameters objects](#_create_and_update_h_264_video_session_parameters_objects)
- [4.3._Create_and_update_H.264_video_session_parameters_objects](#_create_and_update_h_264_video_session_parameters_objects)
- [4.4. Record H.264 decode operation (video session without DPB slots)](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_video_session_without_dpb_slots)
- [4.4._Record_H.264_decode_operation_(video_session_without_DPB_slots)](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_video_session_without_dpb_slots)
- [4.5. Record H.264 decode operation with optional reference picture setup](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_with_optional_reference_picture_setup)
- [4.5._Record_H.264_decode_operation_with_optional_reference_picture_setup](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_with_optional_reference_picture_setup)
- [4.6. Record H.264 decode operation with reference picture list](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_with_reference_picture_list)
- [4.6._Record_H.264_decode_operation_with_reference_picture_list](#_record_h_264_decode_operation_with_reference_picture_list)
- [5. Issues](#_issues)
- [5.1. RESOLVED: In what form should codec-specific parameters be provided?](#_resolved_in_what_form_should_codec_specific_parameters_be_provided)
- [5.1._RESOLVED:_In_what_form_should_codec-specific_parameters_be_provided?](#_resolved_in_what_form_should_codec_specific_parameters_be_provided)
- [5.2. RESOLVED: Why the vulkan_video_codec_h264std video std header does not have a version number?](#_resolved_why_the_vulkan_video_codec_h264std_video_std_header_does_not_have_a_version_number)
- [5.2._RESOLVED:_Why_the_vulkan_video_codec_h264std_video_std_header_does_not_have_a_version_number?](#_resolved_why_the_vulkan_video_codec_h264std_video_std_header_does_not_have_a_version_number)
- [5.3. RESOLVED: What are the requirements for the codec-specific input parameters and bitstream data?](#_resolved_what_are_the_requirements_for_the_codec_specific_input_parameters_and_bitstream_data)
- [5.3._RESOLVED:_What_are_the_requirements_for_the_codec-specific_input_parameters_and_bitstream_data?](#_resolved_what_are_the_requirements_for_the_codec_specific_input_parameters_and_bitstream_data)
- [5.4. RESOLVED: Why is there a need for the application to specify the offset of individual slices of the decoded pictures?](#_resolved_why_is_there_a_need_for_the_application_to_specify_the_offset_of_individual_slices_of_the_decoded_pictures)
- [5.4._RESOLVED:_Why_is_there_a_need_for_the_application_to_specify_the_offset_of_individual_slices_of_the_decoded_pictures?](#_resolved_why_is_there_a_need_for_the_application_to_specify_the_offset_of_individual_slices_of_the_decoded_pictures)
- [5.5. RESOLVED: Are interlaced frames supported?](#_resolved_are_interlaced_frames_supported)
- [5.5._RESOLVED:_Are_interlaced_frames_supported?](#_resolved_are_interlaced_frames_supported)
- [5.6. RESOLVED: How are interlaced frames stored?](#_resolved_how_are_interlaced_frames_stored)
- [5.6._RESOLVED:_How_are_interlaced_frames_stored?](#_resolved_how_are_interlaced_frames_stored)
- [5.7. RESOLVED: How should DPB images be created in case of interlaced frame support?](#_resolved_how_should_dpb_images_be_created_in_case_of_interlaced_frame_support)
- [5.7._RESOLVED:_How_should_DPB_images_be_created_in_case_of_interlaced_frame_support?](#_resolved_how_should_dpb_images_be_created_in_case_of_interlaced_frame_support)
- [5.8. RESOLVED: How should both fields of an interlaced frame be specified as part of the active reference picture list?](#_resolved_how_should_both_fields_of_an_interlaced_frame_be_specified_as_part_of_the_active_reference_picture_list)
- [5.8._RESOLVED:_How_should_both_fields_of_an_interlaced_frame_be_specified_as_part_of_the_active_reference_picture_list?](#_resolved_how_should_both_fields_of_an_interlaced_frame_be_specified_as_part_of_the_active_reference_picture_list)
- [5.9. RESOLVED: Is H.264 Multiview content supported?](#_resolved_is_h_264_multiview_content_supported)
- [5.9._RESOLVED:_Is_H.264_Multiview_content_supported?](#_resolved_is_h_264_multiview_content_supported)
- [5.10. RESOLVED: Why are H.264 level indicator values specified differently than the way they are defined in the codec specification?](#_resolved_why_are_h_264_level_indicator_values_specified_differently_than_the_way_they_are_defined_in_the_codec_specification)
- [5.10._RESOLVED:_Why_are_H.264_level_indicator_values_specified_differently_than_the_way_they_are_defined_in_the_codec_specification?](#_resolved_why_are_h_264_level_indicator_values_specified_differently_than_the_way_they_are_defined_in_the_codec_specification)
- [5.11. RESOLVED: How is reference picture setup requested for H.264 decode operations?](#_resolved_how_is_reference_picture_setup_requested_for_h_264_decode_operations)
- [5.11._RESOLVED:_How_is_reference_picture_setup_requested_for_H.264_decode_operations?](#_resolved_how_is_reference_picture_setup_requested_for_h_264_decode_operations)
- [6. Further Functionality](#_further_functionality)
- [6._Further_Functionality](#_further_functionality)

## Content

Table of Contents 1. Problem Statement 2. Solution Space 3. Proposal 3.1. Video Std Headers 3.2. H.264 Decode Profiles 3.3. H.264 Decode Capabilities 3.4. H.264 Decode Parameter Sets 3.5. H.264 Decoding Parameters 4. Examples 4.1. Select queue family with H.264 decode support 4.2. Check support and query the capabilities for an H.264 decode profile 4.3. Create and update H.264 video session parameters objects 4.4. Record H.264 decode operation (video session without DPB slots) 4.5. Record H.264 decode operation with optional reference picture setup 4.6. Record H.264 decode operation with reference picture list 5. Issues 5.1. RESOLVED: In what form should codec-specific parameters be provided? 5.2. RESOLVED: Why the vulkan_video_codec_h264std video std header does not have a version number? 5.3. RESOLVED: What are the requirements for the codec-specific input parameters and bitstream data? 5.4. RESOLVED: Why is there a need for the application to specify the offset of individual slices of the decoded pictures? 5.5. RESOLVED: Are interlaced frames supported? 5.6. RESOLVED: How are interlaced frames stored? 5.7. RESOLVED: How should DPB images be created in case of interlaced frame support? 5.8. RESOLVED: How should both fields of an interlaced frame be specified as part of the active reference picture list? 5.9. RESOLVED: Is H.264 Multiview content supported? 5.10. RESOLVED: Why are H.264 level indicator values specified differently than the way they are defined in the codec specification? 5.11. RESOLVED: How is reference picture setup requested for H.264 decode operations? 6. Further Functionality This document outlines a proposal to enable performing H.264/AVC video decode operations in Vulkan. The VK_KHR_video_queue extension introduces support for video coding operations and the VK_KHR_video_decode_queue extension further extends this with APIs specific to video decoding. The goal of this proposal is to build upon this infrastructure to introduce support for decoding elementary video stream sequences compliant with the H.264/AVC video compression standard. As the VK_KHR_video_queue and VK_KHR_video_decode_queue extensions already laid down the architecture for how codec-specific video decode extensions need to be designed, this extension only needs to define the APIs to provide the necessary codec-specific parameters at various points during the use of the codec-independent APIs. In particular: APIs allowing to specify H.264 sequence and picture parameter sets (SPS, PPS) to be stored in video session parameters objects APIs allowing to specify H.264 information specific to the decoded picture, including references to previously stored SPS and PPS entries APIs allowing to specify H.264 reference picture information specific to the active reference pictures and optional reconstructed picture used in video decode operations The following options have been considered to choose the structure of these definitions: Allow specifying packed codec-specific data to the APIs in the form they appear in bitstreams Specify codec-specific parameters through custom type definitions that the application can populate after parsing the corresponding data elements in the bitstreams Option (1) would allow for a simpler API, but it requires implementations to include an appropriate parser for these data elements. As decoding applications typically parse these data elements for other reasons anyway, this proposal choses option (2) to enable the application to provide the needed parameters through custom definitions provided by a video std header dedicated to H.264 video decoding. The following additional options have been considered to choose the way this video std header is defined: Include all definitions in this H.264 video decode std header Add a separate video std header that includes H.264 parameter definitions that can be shared across video decoding and video encoding use cases that the H.264 video decode std header depends on, and only include decode-specific definitions in the H.264 video decode std header Both options are reasonable, however, as the H.264 video decoding and H.264 video encoding functionalities were designed in parallel, this extension uses option (2) and introduces the following new video std headers: vulkan_video_codec_h264std - containing common definitions for all H.264 video coding operations vulkan_video_codec_h264std_decode - containing definitions specific to H.264 video decoding operations These headers can be included as follows: #include #include This extension uses the new vulkan_video_codec_h264std_decode video std header. Implementations must always support at least version 1.0.0 of this video std header. This extension introduces the new video codec operation VK_VIDEO_CODEC_OPERATION_DECODE_H264_BIT_KHR. This flag can be used to check whether a particular queue family supports decoding H.264/AVC content, as returned in VkQueueFamilyVideoPropertiesKHR. An H.264 decode profile can be defined through a VkVideoProfileInfoKHR structure using this new video codec operation and by including the following new codec-specific profile information structure in the pNext chain: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264ProfileInfoKHR { VkStructureType sType; const void* pNext; StdVideoH264ProfileIdc stdProfileIdc; VkVideoDecodeH264PictureLayoutFlagBitsKHR pictureLayout; } VkVideoDecodeH264ProfileInfoKHR; stdProfileIdc specifies the H.264 profile indicator, while pictureLayout provides information about the representation of pictures usable with a video session created with such a video profile, and takes its value from the following new flag bit type: typedef enum VkVideoDecodeH264PictureLayoutFlagBitsKHR { VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_PROGRESSIVE_KHR = 0, VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_INTERLEAVED_LINES_BIT_KHR = 0x00000001, VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_SEPARATE_PLANES_BIT_KHR = 0x00000002, VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_FLAG_BITS_MAX_ENUM_KHR = 0x7FFFFFFF } VkVideoDecodeH264PictureLayoutFlagBitsKHR; If pictureLayout is zero (VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_PROGRESSIVE_KHR), then the video profile only allows producing and consuming progressive frames. Otherwise, it also supports interlaced frames, and the individual bits indicate the way individual fields of such interlaced frames are represented within the images backing the video picture resources. In particular: VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_INTERLEAVED_LINES_BIT_KHR indicates that the top and bottom fields are stored interleaved across the scanlines of the video picture resources, with all lines belonging to the top field being stored at even-numbered lines within the picture resource, and all lines belonging to the bottom field being stored at odd-numbered lines within the picture resource. VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_SEPARATE_PLANES_BIT_KHR indicates that the top and bottom fields are stored separately, i.e. all lines belonging to a field are grouped together in a single image subregion. The two fields comprising the frame thus can be stored in separate image subregions of the same image subresource or in separate image subresources. It is expected that most implementations will at least support the VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_INTERLEAVED_LINES_BIT_KHR picture layout, but support for any particular interlaced picture layout is not mandatory. Applications need to verify support for individual H.264 decode profiles specifying particular picture layouts using the vkGetPhysicalDeviceVideoCapabilitiesKHR command. The VK_ERROR_VIDEO_PICTURE_LAYOUT_NOT_SUPPORTED_KHR error code indicates that the chosen picture layout is not supported by the implementation. Applications need to include the following new structure in the pNext chain of VkVideoCapabilitiesKHR when calling the vkGetPhysicalDeviceVideoCapabilitiesKHR command to retrieve the capabilities specific to H.264 video decoding: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264CapabilitiesKHR { VkStructureType sType; void* pNext; StdVideoH264LevelIdc maxLevelIdc; VkOffset2D fieldOffsetGranularity; } VkVideoDecodeH264CapabilitiesKHR; maxLevelIdc indicates the maximum supported H.264 level indicator, while fieldOffsetGranularity indicates the alignment requirements of the codedOffset values specified for video picture resources when using the VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_SEPARATE_PLANES_BIT_KHR picture layout. The use of video session parameters objects is mandatory when decoding H.264 video streams. Applications need to include the following new structure in the pNext chain of VkVideoSessionParametersCreateInfoKHR when creating video session parameters objects for H.264 decode use, to specify the parameter set capacity of the created objects: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264SessionParametersCreateInfoKHR { VkStructureType sType; const void* pNext; uint32_t maxStdSPSCount; uint32_t maxStdPPSCount; const VkVideoDecodeH264SessionParametersAddInfoKHR* pParametersAddInfo; } VkVideoDecodeH264SessionParametersCreateInfoKHR; The optional pParametersAddInfo member also allows specifying an initial set of parameter sets to add to the created object: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264SessionParametersAddInfoKHR { VkStructureType sType; const void* pNext; uint32_t stdSPSCount; const StdVideoH264SequenceParameterSet* pStdSPSs; uint32_t stdPPSCount; const StdVideoH264PictureParameterSet* pStdPPSs; } VkVideoDecodeH264SessionParametersAddInfoKHR; This structure can also be included in the pNext chain of VkVideoSessionParametersUpdateInfoKHR used in video session parameters update operations to add further parameter sets to an object after its creation. Individual parameter sets are stored using parameter set IDs as their keys, specifically: H.264 SPS entries are identified using a seq_parameter_set_id value H.264 PPS entries are identified using a pair of seq_parameter_set_id and pic_parameter_set_id values The H.264/AVC video compression standard always requires an SPS and PPS, hence the application has to add an instance of each parameter set to the used parameters object before being able to record video decode operations. Furthermore, the H.264/AVC video compression standard also allows modifying existing parameter sets, but as parameters already stored in video session parameters objects cannot be changed in Vulkan, the application has to create new parameters objects in such cases, as described in the proposal for VK_KHR_video_queue. Decode parameters specific to H.264 need to be provided by the application through the pNext chain of VkVideoDecodeInfoKHR, using the following new structure: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264PictureInfoKHR { VkStructureType sType; const void* pNext; const StdVideoDecodeH264PictureInfo* pStdPictureInfo; uint32_t sliceCount; const uint32_t* pSliceOffsets; } VkVideoDecodeH264PictureInfoKHR; pStdPictureInfo points to the codec-specific decode parameters defined in the vulkan_video_codec_h264std_decode video std header, while the pSliceOffsets array contains the relative offset of individual slices of the picture within the video bitstream range used by the video decode operation. Specific flags within the codec-specific decode parameters are used to determine whether the picture to be decoded is a frame or a field, according to the table below: field_pic_flag bottom_field_flag frame / field 0 ignored frame 1 0 top field 1 1 bottom field The active SPS and PPS (sourced from the bound video session parameters object) are identified by the seq_parameter_set_id and pic_parameter_set_id parameters. Picture information specific to H.264 for the active reference pictures and the optional reconstructed picture need to be provided by the application through the pNext chain of corresponding elements of VkVideoDecodeInfoKHR::pReferenceSlots and the pNext chain of VkVideoDecodeInfoKHR::pSetupReferenceSlot, respectively, using the following new structure: typedef struct VkVideoDecodeH264DpbSlotInfoKHR { VkStructureType sType; const void* pNext; const StdVideoDecodeH264ReferenceInfo* pStdReferenceInfo; } VkVideoDecodeH264DpbSlotInfoKHR; pStdReferenceInfo points to the codec-specific reference picture parameters defined in the vulkan_video_codec_h264std_decode video std header. Specific flags within the codec-specific reference picture parameters are used to determined whether the picture is a frame or a field, according to the table below: top_field_flag bottom_field_flag frame / field 0 0 frame 1 0 top field 0 1 bottom field 1 1 both fields (for active reference pictures only) The ability to specify both fields is specific to the list of active reference pictures provided in VkVideoDecodeInfo::pReferenceSlots and is needed to allow the application to use both fields of an interlaced frame when the two fields are stored in the same video picture resource, which happens when using the VK_VIDEO_DECODE_H264_PICTURE_LAYOUT_INTERLACED_INTERLEAVED_LINES_BIT_KHR picture layout. As a consequence, the value of VkVideoDecodeInfo::referenceSlotCount is not always indicative of the total number of active reference pictures used by a video decode operation, as a single element of pReferenceSlots may refer to two reference pictures in this case. It is the application’s responsibility to specify video bitstream buffer data and codec-specific parameters that are compliant with the rules defined by the H.264/AVC video compression standard. While it is not illegal, from the API usage’s point of view, to specify non-compliant inputs, they may cause the video decode operation to complete unsuccessfully and will cause the output pictures (decode output and reconstructed pictures) to have undefined contents after the execution of the operation. For more information about how to parse individual H.264 bitstream syntax elements, calculate derived values, and, in general, how to interpret these parameters, please refer to the corresponding sections of the ITU-T H.264 Specification. uint32_t queueFamilyIndex; uint32_t queueFamilyCount; vkGetPhysicalDeviceQueueFamilyProperties2(physicalDevice, &queueFamilyCount, NULL); VkQueueFamilyProperties2* props = calloc(queueFamilyCount, sizeof(VkQueueFamilyProperties2)); VkQueueFamilyVideoPropertiesKHR* videoProps = calloc(queueFamilyCount, sizeof(VkQueueFamilyVideoPropertiesKHR)); for (queueFamilyIndex = 0; queueFamilyIndex ., not the decimal encoding used within raw H.264/AVC bitstreams. As specifying a reconstructed picture DPB slot and resource is always required per the latest revision of the video extensions, additional codec syntax controls whether reference picture setup is requested and, in response, the DPB slot is activated with the reconstructed picture. For H.264 decode, reference picture setup is requested and the DPB slot specified for the reconstructed picture is activated with the picture if and only if the StdVideoDecodeH264PictureInfo::flags.is_reference flag is set. Future extensions can further extend the capabilities provided here, e.g. exposing support to decode H.264 Multiview content.
