# Fragment Shading Rate

## Metadata

- **Component**: samples
- **Version**: latest
- **URL**: /samples/latest/samples/extensions/fragment_shading_rate_dynamic/README.html

## Table of Contents

- [Shading Rate Image](#_shading_rate_image)
- [Shading_Rate_Image](#_shading_rate_image)
- [Encoding the Shading Rate](#_encoding_the_shading_rate)
- [Encoding_the_Shading_Rate](#_encoding_the_shading_rate)
- [Implementation Details](#_implementation_details)
- [Calculating Frequency Information in a Separate Renderpass](#_calculating_frequency_information_in_a_separate_renderpass)
- [Calculating_Frequency_Information_in_a_Separate_Renderpass](#_calculating_frequency_information_in_a_separate_renderpass)

## Content

The source for this sample can be found in the Khronos Vulkan samples github repository. The KHR fragment shading rate extension introduces the ability to selectively render at different sample rates within the same rendered image. This can be useful when rendering at very high resolutions or when the frequency content is not evenly spread through the rendered image. This tutorial demonstrates one way of controlling that sample rate by estimating the frequency content of each pixel of the rendered image. The fragment shading rate extension can be enabled through the VK_KHR_fragment_shading_rate device extension and the VkPhysicalDeviceFragmentShadingRateFeaturesKHR device features. This sample demonstrates the attachment capability, in which the render pass directly references the shading rate image through a VkFragmentShadingRateAttachmentInfoKHR struct attached to the .pNext of a sub-pass. The image below shows the scene from this sample. Note the areas of high image variation in the center of each cube face, and the areas of low image variation in the sky and plain corners of each cube face. When used as an attachment, each pixel within the shading rate image controls a "texel", or fixed region within the output image, specified by shadingRateAttachmentTexelSize. For example, each pixel in the shading rate image might control the shading rate of a 4x4 texel within the rendered image, since all output pixels of the texel are shaded at the same rate, the shading rate image has a lower resolution. The number and type of possible shading rates is controlled by the device and can be queried through the vkGetPhysicalDeviceFragmentShadingRatesKHR function, and may include shading rates that vary in both the x- and y-directions, for instance 1x2 or 4x2 pixel texels. These supported shading rate values are provided to the "compute shader" when determining the optimal shading rate. This sample demonstrates how to use a dynamic shading rate that responds to the frequency content of the image. To achieve this, an attachment is added to the fragment shader at location=1, where the x- and y- derivatives are estimated using the dFdx and dFdy functions. A separate compute shader then processes all the pixels within the texel of the derivative image to determine the new fragment shading rate for the next image: texels with higher squared derivatives calculated using dFdx and dFdy will be afforded a higher shading rate during the next frame compared to texels with lower derivatives. The frequency information is visualized below and can be accessed by selecting "Frequency" in the data visualization dropdown in the sample GUI. Shading rates are encoded using 8-bit unsigned integers. For instance, the lowest shading rate of a 4x4 texel is given by: (4>>1) | (4>1)|(rate_y> 1) | (optimal_rate_y << 1); This rate code is placed into shading_rate_image_compute. Because of the device format requirements of the fragment shading rate extension (and the incompatibility of usage flags), the shading_rate_image and shading_rate_image_compute images are separate and have different usage flags: VK_IMAGE_USAGE_FRAGMENT_SHADING_RATE_ATTACHMENT_BIT_KHR for the shading rate attachment image and VK_IMAGE_USAGE_STORAGE_BIT for the "compute" image (in addition to transfer bits). However, their content is identical, and after the "compute shader" has completed, the contents from shading_rate_image_compute are copied to shading_rate_image. One problem with calculating the frequency information during the render pass is that each frame is using the previous frame’s shading rate, which results in a feedback loop that lead to unstable or "stutter" in the calculated frequency information. To prevent this problem, this sample introduces a separate renderpass that calculates the frequency information without using the shading rate attachment. To maintain performance, this renderpass is performed at a lower resolution controllable by the "Subpass size reduction" option in the sample GUI. In production systems, MSAA can also be disabled. For instance, at a 4x4 reduction with MSAA disabled, the frequency information calculation is performed over only 1/128 as many samples as the full resolution with 8 MSAA samples. If the resulting shading rate image is used to reduce the full-resolution samples by half, then the total sample reduction is still greater than 40%.
